---
layout: post
title: "Nicolas Côté on measuring freedom"
date: 2020-08-22
---
<p>Nicolas Côté (2020). <a href="https://doi.org/10.1086/707214" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Weakness of will and the measurement of freedom</a>. <cite>Ethics</cite> 130 (3): 384–414.</p>

<p>Nicolas Côté’s aim is ambitious: he wants to bring issues of the weakness of will front and centre in the debates on how freedom (of choice) should be measured. More precisely, if measures of freedom, as the literature has argued, must involve some <cite>comparison</cite> of the various sets of options available to agents, then these measures must also incorporate the issue of <cite>differential accessibility</cite>: some sets are less accessible than other sets and, at the limit, some sets are even inaccessible. Existing measures, Côté argues, are sensitive only to the limit cases of perfect accessibility and perfect inaccessibility. ‘Degrees of accessibility’ is thus Côté’s main contribution to the literature on the measurement of freedom, breaking the stark binary partition of accessibility vs inaccessibility into a more fine-grained continuum of accessibility.</p>

<p>Let us start with a case that Côté uses to motivate his approach:</p>

<p style="padding-left:100px;">“Consider first Weak-Willed Willy and Resolute Regina. Suppose that every night for a whole week both have the choice between four alternatives: completing job applications, solving logic problem sets, working on their essays, and going out to drink with friends. In other words, their opportunity sets are identical. Both would love nothing more than to go out with their friends, but they have resolved not to because this would adversely affect their capacity to meet urgent deadlines with respect to their work, and they both judge that meeting these deadlines is more important than enjoying themselves that week. Regina, being resolute, is pretty consistently successful in recruiting the motivation to resist temptation, and she is very skilled at shifting her attention toward cues that facilitate self-control. She is quite reliable: if she says she will do something, or that she judges that she ought to do it, it is generally a sure bet that she will. Willy, by contrast, is a flake, generally unsuccessful in resisting temptation when it presents itself, and unskilled at refocusing his attention. He is almost always carried away by his present urges to renege on his previously stated intentions and judgments.” (393–394)</p>

<p>Classical measures of freedom, based on less or more sophisticated ways of incorporating the cardinality of sets or the quality of their members, must conclude that the two agents are equally free: after all, both share identical opportunity sets, with an identical number of equally desirable identical members. And yet, Côté continues, intuitively we must say that Willy is less free than Regina is. (Let’s grant this.) How can that be? The reason for this freedom differential, Côté ultimately argues, is that the options are not equally accessible to each agent: Regina is very skilled at thwarting temptation and the options are, say, maximally accessible to her; Willy, on the other hand, cannot access these options so easily.</p>

<p>Côté presents this solution as a generalisation of the classical approach (406ff) which only admits of perfectly accessible or perfectly inaccessible options. By allowing for intermediate values of accessibility, we can explain how it is that Willy’s ‘total accessibility’ to the same set of (otherwise, not perfectly inaccessible) options is less than that of Regina’s. So far so good: we can grant that such a generalisation is possible and, admittedly as most generalisations are, valuable. Implicitly buried in Côté’s discussion, however, are issues of agent-neutrality and agent-relativity that merit bringing out more explicitly. For being more explicit about these issues grants even more generality to Côté’s approach. The remainder explains why.</p>

<p style="padding-left:100px;"><u>Preliminaries</u></p>

<p>Start with some preliminaries. Say that \(X\) is the (universal finite) set of all mutually exclusive options. Set \(Z\), the power set of \(X\), is the set of all possible opportunity sets. The relation \(\succeq\) is then a binary relation on \(Z\), that is, \(\succeq \subseteq Z \times Z\), that is transitive, nonsymmetric and reflexive (387). Thus, \(A \succeq B\) means (the opportunity set) \(A\) offers at least as much freedom as (the opportunity set) \(B\). The question now is: what kind of properties should \(\succeq\) satisfy so that the resulting (comparative) measure of freedom is a plausible one? (A question that Côté asks but does not go into with respect to his own approach.)</p>

<p>There are many existing measures motivated by, or argued against on the basis of, numerous properties (see Côté’s excellent discussion of the classical literature here). But they all, Côté argues, share one common feature that precludes incorporating the issue of differential accessibility: they all assume that set membership is bivalent. That is to say, that an option \(w\) either belongs to or does not belong to an opportunity set \(W\). It is this bivalence that Côté questions and then relaxes as a way of introducing a new measure that is sensitive to weakness-of-will issues.</p>

<p style="padding-left:100px;"><u>Côté’s proposal: Fuzzy freedom</u></p>

<p>In short, Côté’s proposal is to conceive of opportunity sets not as bivalent sets but as fuzzy sets. More precisely, say that an opportunity set is a pair, \((X, m)\) where \(X\) is the familiar set of all options and \(m\) is a membership function that maps each element of \(X\) on the unit interval. The scalar \(m(w)\) of an option \(w \in X\) is the option’s ‘membership grade’: in the classical bivalent case, an option can have only one of two grades—zero or one. Let \(Z^{*}\) collect all such pairs. Further, given a set \(W\), let \(\mu_{W}\) denote the set’s membership function. (Hence, by definition, \(m \equiv \mu_{X}\).) And let the cardinality of a set be defined as the sum of its elements’ membership grades: \(|W| = \sum_{w \in W} \mu_{W}(w)\).</p>

<p>Clearly, fuzzy sets expand the classical bivalent case where an option \(w\) in a set \(W\) can be either, as Côté’s puts it, “fully accessible” (when \(\mu_{W}(w) = 1\)), or “not available” (when \(\mu_{W}(w) = 0\)). Rather, an option can now also be “partially accessible” (when \(\mu_{W}(w) \in (0, 1)\)) (406). The substantive interpretation Côté gives of \(\mu_{W}(w)\) is that of “conditional probability”: “the chance that an agent can successfully choose [\(w\)] if they intend to” (407).</p>

<p>Let’s summarise the two approaches. In Côté’s fuzzy approach, we have:</p>

<p style="padding-left:100px;"><strong>Fuzzy freedom</strong>. Freedom (of choice) is a function of the accessibility of options in an agent’s opportunity set, where an agent’s opportunity set is a pair \((X, \mu_{X})\), with \(X\) being the respective universal set and \(\mu_{X}\) being the set’s membership function:</p>

<p style="padding-left:100px;">\(\mu_{X}: X \rightarrow [0, 1]\)</p>

<p>It’s a generalisation of the classical approach where the only difference is the definition of \(\mu_{X}\):</p>

<p style="padding-left:100px;"><strong>Classical freedom</strong>. Freedom (of choice) is a function of the accessibility of options in an agent’s opportunity set, where an agent’s opportunity set is a pair \((X, \mu_{X})\), with \(X\) being the respective universal set and \(\mu_{X}\) being the set’s membership function:</p>

<p style="padding-left:100px;">\(\mu_{X}: X \rightarrow \{0, 1\}\)</p>

<p>So far so good. How do the two approaches handle the case of Regina and Willy? All things equal (the quality and desirability of options, say), that is to say, when set membership is the only issue relevant to freedom, Côté claims, the two approaches fare differently. This, however, is not true; at least, not with the machinery introduced so far. Notice that, in Côté’s framework (outlined above), membership functions are set-specific (I used \(\mu_{X}\) instead of \(m\) to underscore this): different sets have different membership functions. This is unobjectionable and it is indeed what allows Côté to generalise the ideas of cardinality and membership to fuzzy sets. However, what Côté needs in order to treat Regina’s and Willy’s cases differently are (additionally) agent-specific membership functions. In other words, we need to allow for the fact that <cite>for each set</cite>, there exists <cite>for each agent</cite> a membership function \(\mu_{X}^{i}\). Intuitively, this simply brings out explicitly the approach that Côté is at least implicitly getting at:</p>
